I'll go on.
Now we're talking to Nico Israel.
And you mentioned, sir, that you know the story of Avon or more, because I'm going to update that chapter in a future edition of the book.
Don't mention.
No, but I won't.
I mean, it's correct, but I'm telling you nothing... No fantasy.
In 1975, we had Inhold and Amsterdam, an international affair.
Among the American visitors was a man named Haven O'Moore.
Never heard of him.
He comes a man, which is rather for friendship.
It is like it is, and so I never knew of Haven O'Moore.
When he came to my booth, I had done a rather important rare emphasis, good condition.
Not a tremendous price, let's say 40,000 or something like that.
He saw it and he liked it and he said, you're going to give me a discount.
He says that every day.
And then he was rather persistent and I said, no, I'm sorry, not my habit.
Then you have to look for another client.
I said, that's fine, Mr. Moore, but at least the point in a way is,
I didn't think that you are my type of, that I am your type of bookseller.
And I don't find that you are my type of collector.
By Mr. O'Moore.
This was that.
An hour later he comes back and says, I'll give him another thought and probably I may be willing to buy it.
I said, I'm totally sorry.
But his husband is great.
I just sold it to one of my Dutch clients.
Impossible.
Who wants a book like that except me?
I said, well, Mr. Moore, you may believe me, then I'll say something.
I'll tell you something.
It's the truth.
I think it's not the truth.
I saw the book just half an hour after you left.
And you did.
Of course.
So, about a year later, I got a telephone call from
He lived in Amsterdam and I said, I would like to see him.
I said, of course, you're welcome.
We met.
I think you'll see his collector.
And I always like to talk with people and say, oh, fine, come.
So I had enough.
He's at the Kaiserschaft in Amsterdam and he came there.
I showed him a great, great book.
It was a great book.
uh famous early edition of colonies in a way it is the second west map in a way the first this real map some of the first is a kind of different one different 77 and 78 wrong edition besides the bare rare orchids and they're cable and he bought it
That was at the sale.
That was in the sale.
Yeah, and then I had it in my catalogue.
Catalogue was just going to be printed, and he bought it.
So that was that.
He paid the bill.
Everything was fine.
So that was the first time I met his wife, and I said she was a very nice woman.
And that was that.
We met again in the United States, somewhere in New York.
That's kind of the way, did he introduce himself as Dr. Romo?
That I can't remember.
I think he introduced himself as Abraham.
He always wanted to be known as Abraham.
He was a good looking man.
Oh yes, absolutely.
He impressed a lot of people.
He fooled a lot of people.
Yeah, but then I read your story.
I still can't make it out.
I'll tell you more when we're done.
I know, I've since learned a lot more.
Because he threatened to sue me, you know, as you can imagine.
Oh, he did?
Oh, yeah.
But he threatened, he didn't.
And he can't now because it's too late.
There's nothing to sue me about.
You can only sue if I made mistakes.
I must say that when I read the story, it's like yours.
It's the same story.
Tries to get him down.
on the price.
But he didn't ask a question from me.
He wanted 10%.
That's not my habit.
I mean, I saw books at a fixed price, and then you can prove you're a dealer, you get your 10%.
Otherwise, that's right.
This is business.
It's like asking a doctor to give you a discount for his services.
He told me about
He told all kinds of fairy tales, I suppose.
But I'm not sure.
He said, he may have told that he was.
Now, I said, do you keep your fantastic library, because Daniel, I think, whether he's led by a fantastic book service, yes, in your home, in your house.
He said, well, yes, but it's so well protected by all the technical means that no one is there.
because and that i can remember i am interested in this uh field of technique or i am a partner in one of the uh he couldn't he couldn't even keep his life he couldn't even keep his life straight uh yeah thank you it was not my favorite good for you but you picked right up on that no but he had the uh
I must say, the courage and the knowledge to buy the great books wherever they came.
Because you need not only money, you know, it also remains courage to spend the money.
That's right.
Easier when it is not only your money, I agree.
But when you are a responsible person, then
It doesn't make much difference.
You know, he loves books.
We have to give him that.
No, no.
Fantastic books.
Yeah.
And well chosen.
I like it.
Yeah.
I had another client.
No, no, no.
I had a client who has a different taste, but sometimes they were in the same
both interested in the same book, and then we always sacrifice one third against the other.
And while I am coming from a country where money is still money and you don't throw away money, I'm much more careful in spending other money, even more.
We need the other's money.
Well, I'm so interested in your own experiences.
Well, come on, but you tell me.
You ask questions.
Okay.
I'm really interested in this trip, this European tradition of bookselling.
I know that you come from a family of booksellers.
My father was a bookseller, yes.
And his brother's... I had his brother, 10 years old.
He would have been, could have been one of great booksellers.
in the world after the war, because he knew everything.
But he was killed.
And his name was Solomon.
How did you spell Solomon?
Like the... King of Israel.
S-O-O.
S-A-L-O-M-O-N.
You say Solomon, you say Solomon.
Solomon.
And he was at 40 during the war?
He was.
He was born from 1900.
So he had already spent some time.
He already had spent some time, and he was the born of that book.
He knew a book before having seen it, or having heard it.
Really?
No, he was, in that respect, was great.
How can you explain he knew a book before he saw it?
I love that story.
Because, well, that's difficult to explain.
A kind of intuition, as the Germans say.
You have it or you don't.
He could smell a good book.
And he was a very self-educated person.
He never stopped reading.
And what were his interests?
In everything he was interested.
An autodidact.
He was an autodidact.
Was he kind of a hero for you?
No.
But we really got along very well.
He was my bigger brother.
He was big.
I'm from 1919.
1900, so we had 19 years, which, when you are young, is a very, a real difference.
And so, for as long as you have a memory, you remembered your brother had this great knowledge about poetry.
Absolutely, and he was recognized as such.
I mean, the people who knew books, they came to see him.
And this was in Arnhem?
It was in Arnhem.
Later he started a business in Amsterdam.
He was unmarried.
He was the head of the family.
And he learned from your father, you would say?
I think he learned from himself.
My father was a different kind of man.
My father was a well-educated man.
He was a well-educated man.
And his name was, what was his name?
Bernard.
Bernard, my brother's surname is B-M-U-S.
He was Bernard.
It was another Bernard living in the small town of Ireland, so he made a name himself Bernard Marcus.
Marcus was the name of his father.
M-A-R-C-U-S.
So that's B-M.
And Bernard, B-E-R-N-H-A-R-D?
No H. B-E-R-N-A-R-D.
So your father was very well educated?
He was well educated, but came from a typical Jewish provincial family.
No money, a lot of children, and everybody had to go out to get themselves as young as possible.
How do you suppose your father chose to be a bookseller?
I don't know, but he was born to become a bookseller, absolutely.
Perhaps you can explain a little bit.
He loved books.
He knew books.
He was devoted to books.
He devoted, and that is probably the most important.
He was very devoted to people interested in books.
You see, even books only are not enough.
You have to have some connection with people.
I think that was one of his great gifts.
I've been young enough, I'd say we were, my brother must have told you, we were nine children.
He didn't tell me the number.
But there were nine, four sons and five daughters.
I was one of the youngest, but I was the youngest son.
And when I became 18, for the first time in history, he had a car because I could drive a car.
So I went to a lot of traveling with my father.
18?
18, yeah, 19.
I had to recall from that time earlier in this country.
So in certain seconds of the course, I got my license and the car was built.
And so we went to a lot of traveling together.
Sitting in the car with my father-in-law was reset.
He was going to do everything and he was...
Very much interest in politics and everything that had concerned life and society.
And how did that work into becoming a bookseller?
I think that's what I said.
I think he was born a bookseller.
That is the kind of bookseller.
What kinds of books was he looking for?
He was looking less than mine for the product.
In, let's say, a regular book.
Mine.
He was interested in any kind of book.
But he was the man who formed in Ireland, wanted to create rare book shops in the world.
And nobody can talk me out of that or buy that.
But that was correct.
We have some very good spies in Germany in the years just before Hitler.
Who did?
Your father?
No, my father.
This is Solomon.
Yeah, Solomon.
And he wrote in Germany the Depression of the First World War and the Depression.
And a lot of these noble families were in the money.
And he succeeded in buying tremendous money.
a library from castles, a tremendous eye member, and I was 13, 14 years old, 12 years old, that I helped to unload a wagon, a train wagon load full of books, and not one later than 1750.
Wow.
That's where it was.
Then thousands of books came in.
Who was selling them?
The owners of the castles?
No, the owners of the castles.
Because of the depression in Germany?
The depression and the inflation before.
So this was a way to get money?
To get some money.
I don't think that there were hundreds of thousands of millions of dollars if that was a question of tens of thousands of dollars.
Because books were not in very...
And of course, when you need food, you'll do anything... Well, then you'll need to have your roof repaired or whatever.
And these books came out of castles all over... All over Germany.
I think they need some parts.
Did he go into Germany himself, or did he have people... No, he had some, like I said, agents.
And then he got news that there might be a possibility, and then he took the train and went to Portugal, didn't.
And then, of course, these books came to Arnhem
I was early, that's why I was waiting outside.
I couldn't.
Outside.
I was just here a few minutes early, that's all.
Oh, I'm sorry.
No, no, no.
I'm sorry, I thought I saw you outside.
I guess I didn't go.
No, no, no, okay.
But it was easy to find.
300 meters.
You only helped him?
Yes.
Oh, yes.
How was it?
It's wonderful.
It's beautiful.
Coffee, tea, something cold.
Something cold, maybe water or something would be good.
Food, juice or something.
Something cold, anything.
Anything cold.
So we were talking about your brother bringing books to ICAM.
Bringing books to ICAM.
And if I'm not easy to sell, first, he was not a cataloging man.
That was his weakness.
Probably his strength as well because, therefore, he could kind of regulate the sales and he needed the money he sold when he didn't get the books.
So the books were heating up in warehouses in Ireland.
You had several warehouses?
At a certain moment, yes.
How many books do you think he had at a given point?
I took an old book because he did a whole kind of books.
A hundred thousand?
A hundred thousand, a hundred thousand.
Wow.
But not only books.
He had a good taste.
He didn't buy everything.
I mean, and then he bought and then, like, say, a lot like that, the first thing he wanted to get rid of the books he didn't like.
So it remained with better ones.
and i remember when we had i mean talking uh particularly 18th century uh bird books flower books houses travel books travel books whatever so but you said he wasn't much of a camera but he knew the books he knew the books
One of my dear colleagues I remember in Germany was Domislav.
Domislav was by far the greatest antiquarian dealer in Germany, but only known to a few people because he never had a publishing title in his own name.
What was his name again?
Dominslav.
Helmut was the first name.
D-O-M-I-Z-L-A-F-F.
Dominslav.
And he was in Germany?
He was in Germany, Munich.
One of the most respected and grand dealers in Germany in the world.
Never published capital.
He worked for...
A part of the Rosenthal's, who had the business in Lugano in years before the war.
And he was working there, and the Rosenthal was a demonstration of herbers.
And he did a description of that capital.
I wonder why.
Did anyone ever ask him why?
Or he didn't have to, I guess.
So he didn't have a shot.
He was living, holding his book in his own apartment in Munich.
It was a little bit difficult to buy from him.
I mean, I came there, and I was a young man, and we know he's, by name at least, because of my brother.
And when
I got easily enthusiastic about a certain book, and he liked me, so he did sell me now and then every book.
But it was very difficult to persuade him to sell you a book if he didn't want to.
Why?
Because he wanted to keep the books?
He wanted to keep the books, because in the middle of the money, and he wanted to make sure they were going to the right place.
And of course he paid the scholarship.
Was he Jewish?
No, not at all.
He had been to Sweden, because one of the bookstores in Sweden was very poor in your time.
It was Billy Eilman of Sandberg.
He was a good bookstores.
He came from Germany.
And it was Domislav who helped him, who assisted him in taking a refuge in countries who built him
I think to the Dutch, the German-Danish border.
There is a great tradition, a European tradition in bookseller, a scholar, bookseller who really, as you're describing your older brother and of course yourself, the people who really understand the books.
It's not just a question of being in business.
I think it achieves a certain kind of
Yeah, it is a cultural function.
It is, but that's only true, let's say, in non-German countries, because in the German countries, I mean, that was that you couldn't settle as a Uxad or an entrepreneur without having, and how do you call it?
permission, or a grant, or no, not a grant.
A license?
A license.
And you could only get a license when you have a certain study.
To become a bookseller?
To become a bookseller.
Is that right?
I didn't know that.
No, no, because even today it's true.
You have to have a license?
You can't be a rare book dealer, or a auctioneer, or a regular bookseller.
when you are not the nice thing to do so.
So you have to have a certain education?
That is something that isn't true in Holland.
It's not true in Holland.
It isn't true in France.
It isn't true in England.
I mean, when you are in the United States, when you want to establish yourself as a bookseller, you open it.
You open a shop and hang up the same.
Or you just start having three books.
That's right.
And calling people.
So the Germans have a system.
A system.
That's for everything.
Yes.
Of course, you know, Barney Rosenthal has written about the Jewish booksellers who left Germany and brought their skill, you know, to North America, to England, and how... That's not true.
I mean, it's... I mean, the English booksellers, the English booksellers, the English trades, for many, many, many years...
Very, very important.
You see a man like Horst coming from Leipzig to London, not the other way it comes.
And firms like Max, Bosch, Edwards, Francis, Edwards, in the United States, sailing in the 19th century already.
And Rosenbach was pretty important.
Rosenbach was pretty important.
Smith was important.
came before him but uh but it is interesting though that there weren't maybe 50 booksellers who i'm not saying they influenced the whole trade but they certainly were very influential but still like today it's the same there is in the world uh book book selling in the world is a lot of small dealers second hand books
call it, and sometimes an old book, not necessarily important old book, but sometimes there are thousands of them.
Then there are, in the world, a good number of leaders, even, let's say, the more important book, whether that is a book of yesterday or a book of 500 years ago, that is not of any importance.
But, and then there have to be very few, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like
I'm going to see Chiesa next month.
He hasn't been well.
He sent me a letter.
He said, please come.
I hope I'm okay when you arrive.
His letter, he said something like that.
So,
Just to finish the story about your brother, your brother didn't survive the war.
No, he was... My wife and I, we escaped to Switzerland by... We had a special line that was known to my parents-in-law.
A line?
A line.
That's a smugglerous line.
OK.
As an escape route.
An escape route, yeah.
But when we were in Brussels, we knew that there the line was going to be cut.
We were the last to make use of it.
So when I arrived in Switzerland, I sent in cables to
books arrived well but further shipments impossible that's all that was that was from switzerland to here well from when we arrived in switzerland
To whom?
Who did you say that they were?
To a friendly bookseller who drove my family to my family.
So you were saying the books arrived, meaning yourself?
Yeah, yeah.
And your wife?
No further shippings possible.
And then the first thing we knew was that my old brother, together with my parents, went up the same route.
And there were siblings because their design was cut.
I knew that.
And this was about 1942.
And this is your brother and your parents?
My parents and me.
So your wife's parents?
My wife's parents.
And that was 1942.
And then you also lost some other members of your family, I think.
Well, there are other members, yeah.
But the rest of the tragedy evolved to the family.
And so after the war, you came back to...
Three of us brothers who came back.
Yourself, and brother Max.
And I had a third brother who was arrested by the Germans, not being a Jew.
He was in a mixed marriage.
I don't know.
Some married to a non-Jewish wife.
He was arrested for going illegal, going against the Germans.
He was convicted for being against Germans.
was being a prisoner sent to one of the Germany's constitution times.
But being a prisoner, and though he had a life, impossibly, they didn't kill him because he had, he was, he had a prison sentence, so they had to keep him alive because all of that was destroyed.
And so he survived.
And he survived.
And what's his name?
Bob.
Bob?
Bill Mead?
Bill Mead.
And so after the war, the three of you started?
Well, we started all over again.
All this business was completely rubbed out.
There was nothing.
When I say nothing, there was nothing.
So you went and you lost?
We lost the greatest success.
Part of our book was .
So they were destroyed.
And a lot of them were destroyed, but we were under control by the Germans.
And they showed all the books we had, or a great part of the book.
So when we came back, we had nothing.
I was with the Canadian units coming back.
and you said you were you were serving 44 and oh so you came but you served in the second so you served with the canadian army i was by the canadian army and uh what year did you did you did you join up with the canadian 44. and that's the army
I joined the Dutch Army.
They were just coming over from England to France, and being a Dutch Army, having been in the Dutch Army before the war.
Thank you so much.
So you came back, you fought?
I came back, you know, and over the Rhine, in St.
Papakirin, over the Rhine, back to the two months.
So when I landed in my region, just north of Ireland, I took my car and went, and that was a big mistake I made, I did, went to Ireland.
It was just liberated the town of the city of Ireland.
And when I was there, believe me or not, I was the only person there.
I was absolutely the opposite.
All the residents were gone.
They had evacuated the town.
Not only evacuated, but they took everything.
They could use oil.
All the furniture.
All the, the, the, the, the femorails, the electrical wiring.
Everything, everything they took.
It was like what we call a ghost town.
It was a ghost town.
Not what you call it.
And this was 45 now?
Oh, 44.
April of 45.
Wow.
That's very dramatic, I have to tell you.
Yes.
Okay.
And did you go into...
books on the same day.
And I found a need of the most important books.
But having later, without any cover, the Dutch winter, the Dutch spring from September through April and the paper.
And there was one
a heap of wet paper.
And it was outside?
It was outside.
I mean, no, the roof was... Oh, the roof was destroyed.
Destroyed, and... There was a heap of... a mass of pulp.
A mass of pulp.
And what was your feeling?
I think it cried.
Yeah.
It's very, very dramatic.
And so...
You decided then?
And so you established yourself down here in Amsterdam.
And tell me how, if you can, you know, if you've got the time, how did you go from nothing to becoming... No.
His English was not... He was three years old.
In fact, he said Nico all the time.
What happened is that when we came back, we hadn't done anything.
The other thing we had was a little experience.
Because in a way, I've never been trained to become a real book dealer.
As I said, we were four brothers.
I was the youngest.
And I came to my father's bookshop.
The royal registry was in it.
So my father decided, if it's good for you, you go and do the regular book trade.
And later I started also on the education.
I'm going to just take a picture while you talk, if you don't mind.
Well, I hope it will come out as well because I am not pretty gentle.
Well, don't worry.
My pictures are good.
Okay, you don't have a use to it.
You said gentle madness, all the pictures are good.
Okay.
Well, I'm worried.
Okay, go ahead.
This is rewinding now.
It's rewinding.
Oh, yeah.
You had three brothers, and you said you were the youngest, and you didn't.
When we came back, I mean, at least we had.
I never, ever be a rare book man.
Of course, I've been grown up in a family where rare books were daily bread and butter, but I've never had any training.
I had one for the economy, and it's a regular bookseller, modern books.
That was a kind of... Actually, I mean, I had to buy them, which I passed, that's okay, but I never had any experience in being a bookseller.
So then I came back, I wasn't a great bookseller.
My brother, who was three years old, he had more experience.
He worked some years in my part of business, and...
He had some knowledge of... He had some knowledge, more knowledge at least than I had, and so he put on things that he did.
But having not one old book and having no, not one penny, he had to start out somewhere.
And then he started being in a modern book shop.
In modern books, you mean?
In modern books.
started coming in modern books and we were helped then by the association of booksellers your brother did say that the association um gave you some stock to get started yeah the yes and that he said said that when you opened there was a whole queue of people who was always
And I will say that for some years we had a thriving trade in modern books.
We seem to have had the right taste and the right appeal for clients, and we had the most interesting clients in Amsterdam.
The book collectors and the authors and the theatre people, that's very much nothing from the forties per year.
Certainly no more.
And at what point did you decide to move into the area?
No, we always had.
That was always our aim.
The goal was to get back to what you... So we bought, piece by piece, we bought old books.
And where were you finding the books at this time after the war?
So you really couldn't buy for stock so much?
No, we couldn't.
We couldn't buy for selling either.
We simply didn't have the money to make the purchase.
So very slowly you... I thought it was an interesting story.
It was an interesting story.
I think it is an interesting story.
I think everything is interesting.
No, no, it's not.
But it was interesting.
I've been, as I told you, a refugee in Switzerland.
I made a report to the Dutch government about... Like I said, I was another bookseller.
after the situation of the Dutch... No, it was a scientific book in Holland after the war.
The situation of the scientific book?
In Holland, modern book in Holland, for a student.
I see, yes.
Yes?
Okay.
Okay, that was... Traditionally, it was German.
I decided that after the war, the first years after the war, the German...
input of books for this purpose would be no, which was correct.
So that was my presumption.
And I decided that being in Switzerland, which was a good idea to check, Switzerland could provide German books for Dutch children.
That was delivered to the embassy in Berlin and sent to London.
But the Dutch government was there.
And a few months later, they came back that the idea was to have the hospital.
Swiss publishers.
Very good, excellent story.
So you perceived this need?
Yes.
And that was the end.
I made a report, because it was fine.
It was then turned under the cane, and I forgot everything about it, until September 45.
Peace was back in Holland.
I got a letter on the Dutch government, whether I was willing to go to Switzerland and make a serious support.
And I was invited to go this then-or-righty good friend of mine in Amsterdam to go together.
Some of the money we got.
That bond cured Sudan and all this chaos.
We've been four of us.
He's one.
I won.
And he worked hard for six weeks.
But while working hard, I was going around to burn.
And in one of the windows, show windows, I don't know.
a bookshop in Bern.
So I went into the shop.
You always had to understand that you didn't know I had one friend.
Getting a simple meal.
So I went into the chateaus in the hall of the lady, and she asked what I wanted, so I said, I think we can do that in my book, may I have a look at it?
So I think, sir.
So she showed me the book, and I said, yes, that's what interests me.
We have more rare, important books like this.
She said, yes, I have more.
Would you like to see him?
I said, yes, I would like to see him.
And then she comes with four or five really great, great books.
Even today,
So, do you remember what?
Yes, sir.
I think in this respect, then the problem was I had no money.
First question, a few thousand Swiss rings altogether.
Several thousand Swiss rings?
Some thousand Swiss rings.
So the money was not
But books were not then all that expensive either.
So I looked at the woman and said, do you trust me?
So that's in what language?
In German.
Do you trust me?
Yes, why not?
So I asked her, would you trust me enough to let me have the books for 24 hours.
I have no money here.
I bring them back within 24 hours.
Or I'll pay you, would you ask me?
Would you ask me?
I took the train to Geneva, same hour, and so took the books to Kendi, one of the great books I was really nice, Kendi, William S. Kendi, K-U-M-D-I-G, okay.
He sold him two books.
Among the books were Ptolemy, 1511, but a fantastic book.
1511?
Uh-huh.
The Danish 1511.
There was a very fine copy of it, a great book.
The first book was in London.
There is Versaceus, there's a link in the media video, there's a B-E-Z... B-S-A-L-I-U-S... I have a Versaceus in Gentle Madness, Castle Norman has it.
It's coming up for sale, do you know that?
Yes, sir?
It's coming up for sale?
Yes, he died.
It's coming up.
I didn't know that.
So they asked someone who was going to come up.
I'll check it out.
I was hoping they'd keep the collection, but that's what happens.
It's good.
It's going back.
When are they going to do that, do you know?
The first one will be in the early next year.
Okay, good.
I'll roll.
I'll do it well.
Because he's in my book.
For sure he is.
I have a picture of him with Veselius.
It was his favorite book.
Of course.
He believes he has the presentation property.
I won't know about that.
It should be very interesting, because I write about it at length.
Well, I know.
So I knew what you wrote about it.
So one of the books was in Veselius.
No, it was Veselius, but the English didn't change.
It's a book that's published in England, and I'm going to say to my man, it's called Gemini, G-E-M-I-N-I.
Some later than 43, I think it was 54 or so.
These are spectacular books.
But the famous copy I've seen since of one of the great books on this colony, that was a book by a man called, a French book, published in Lyon, 1557 or so.
A man called B-A-S-S-E-N-T-Y-N-E.
I can't believe this story.
That's three.
We'll get to that.
Then I went to Lausanne, but it was not a great bookseller.
Same day, right?
You go for it.
Yeah, of course.
I only had one for hours.
Yes.
There's a special thing you need.
To know much, everybody can learn.
Yes, sir.
He has a special feeling for something, for many things.
And I think when he was describing his brother, he was also describing himself, his older brother, about the feel for the books, that you can't teach it.
That's it, that's what I'm talking about, yes.
I often wonder what would have happened if he would have stayed alive and we could have worked together.
It would have been a disaster.
be fighting all the time.
Oh.
No, or you could have built up.
A great empire.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
But that's really OK.
So you had, so then you went to Lausanne.
To Lausanne and stole the book to Nicholas Roche.
Nicholas, and I see.
And Nicholas, yeah, I'm not Nicholas.
Roche.
And did you know them or did you just walk in?
Yeah, because I wasn't in Geneva.
Anyway, I've been very kind to me, I must say.
So I was Nicholas Roche.
They were okay for some reason.
They always treated me like a man, like somebody.
A colleague.
I was so young in those days.
You were?
I was three, four years old.
I've never been in the rare book trade in any way.
Well, you were now.
Right now you were.
At this point in time you were.
That was the first old book I laid my hand on.
And then... And which book did you sell to Roche?
I sold the Basantin to Roche.
The which?
The Basantin.
Oh, the Basantin to Roche.
Okay.
And then I had one book left, and now I'm not sure, and I went to Zurich because I had to be there on time.
So I went off early in the morning
went to Geneva, which is two others, to an artifact train.
So you went to Geneva for it?
Yeah, and first to Geneva, so to .
Went to Los Angeles.
Surrey had one book left.
Went to Surrey, Geneva, Los Angeles, Surrey, and then back to Bern, where I can go in the mid-back.
Okay.
So did you sell a book in Zurich?
As I was concerned.
To whom?
I think that was to Laos, yeah.
That was the firm of Erwin Rosenthal, I was talking about.
Oh, really?
So, Rosenthal?
Rosenthal.
Dr. Erwin Rosenthal.
I-R-W-N.
How do you spell his name, Erwin?
I-R-W-I-N.
E-R.
W. And Rosenthal?
Rosenthal.
And do you remember what that book was?
I think it was Jim.
I think so, yeah.
And they paid me cash, you see, because I had to be paid for it.
So I went to the... To the woman.
And paid her money.
And you made a profit, of course.
I made a profit, and then we had Muslims tested them.
No, not to be forgotten, because suddenly they had the money.
And together, four of us, we treated ourselves with a fantastic deal.
First glass wines and everything.
Now, did you have enough money to get started now and buy some books, do you think?
No, that was the question.
I gave them a few thousand.
Right.
It was money.
Do you remember the name of the woman you bought from?
No.
You can't remember her name?
No, I can't remember my name.
It was not the woman.
She was acting for a Swiss firm, but I can't remember the name of the firm.
I can't visualize the shop, the window, but I can't remember the name of it.
Which is almost, was it, was it, did it look like it was once an important store, or just a store?
No, it was, we had all kinds of books, and in the middle of the center of the window, there was the one book.
Do you remember which one it was?
No, I can't tell you.
That's a great story.
That was that.
So then I was very popular.
So when we came back and we decided, my brother and I, that our luck probably was more than the rare books than the mother was.
And then we had the bad luck, or probably the good luck, that they had to leave the shop where we were in.
Here in Amsterdam?
In Amsterdam.
And we had to establish ourselves among them.
So we couldn't do this anymore.
So we had to .
And then someday I decided that we differ so much.
Our character differ so much.
Yeah, so then I put that at home.
The state plans didn't go far.
Makes sense.
And he's... And I left.
And so it starts again.
Same story.
And when did you start by yourself?
What year?
I was the first of January, 1950.
So you're still a young man, a very young man.
You're still in your 40s, 20s, aren't you?
I was 30.
I was just 30.
Just 30.
Yeah.
And that was it.
So... And then, how did you develop the specialty for which you became well born?
Well, I don't know whether you're interested in it.
I am.
I'm interested in everything, actually.
No, no.
Because it is stupid.
There, I guess, I'm having no money.
I could better spend the few money I had, the little money I had, in buying one good book.
And in buying hundreds published.
So that was what I did.
I bought one book and sold the book, and I had the money to buy another book, and to buy some other books, and to... That's brilliant.
That's... To get money for... to pay for the food, and the rent, and... So you really focused on getting a small number of excellent books.
Yeah, from the beginning of it.
And I think that saved me.
Because I am lazy, I'm not.
No, not correct.
I'm lazy, I'm not right.
But I'm not thriving, I'm not.
Full of energy.
So where did you find these books?
In Amsterdam, my book, at that time.
Until the first time I went to London.
And there I wrote one of the great books.
Yes, I have.
A Dutch book, but don't forget.
Holland is not a world of a small country.
It is not like telling Rosenbach and his Shakespeare's, or Krauss and his encurements, or manuscripts.
It's always a difference in magnitude.
But in reality, important,
It might even be much bigger.
But that's different again, because it is Dutch.
And that's why I decided sometime that that was my prospect as well.
With the Dutch market, too?
The Dutch market, too, because
As I said, I was just talking.
I didn't have much international connections or clients or... Experience.
Experience, not at all.
Before I had been to Denmark, I had a friend who was art dealer, Dutch origin in New York, who came to meet
in the same shop, in the small shop in the last time in Amsterdam.
Well, we came later down, we became good friends.
And he has an American family, a Hudson car.
I don't know whether you remember Hudson cars.
Hudson is one of these great, great American cars.
Oh, the Hudson car.
Of course, it's a wonderful car.
Funny, it had a funny... And that was one of these...
Open one.
Yes.
Beautiful.
Driving in a car like that in Europe, in those days, and at the end the car broke.
It was already sensational.
So we went to Germany where I bought a fantastic coffee, I must say.
In Germany, in Cologne.
The Atlas.
I just saw one in
I saw one up at Stoke Gloucester Castle, up in... I was up at Stoke Gloucester and... Oh, yeah.
But this was my first rebook, and that was sergeant and so on.
March already then.
But you had to pay for this.
Yeah, but I could pay after.
Oh, so they gave you terms.
And did you buy it from an individual or from a...
So the booksellers helped you, the trade helped you.
Yeah, but this was, then it was in Germany, it was impossible to settle, because Cologne was a town, and you can't imagine.
I mean, you could sit down on your knees in the center of Cologne, and you could overlook all the city.
It was rubble.
It was only rubble.
So the bookseller who had a chance to sell, not in German work, that was the point.
You've had to get into it.
It was nothing.
That was even more rubbish.
So the understanding was you take the books and I pay in dollars or pounds, you know, over time.
We did.
And this is now 1950?
That was before 1950.
So it's still right after the war.
And then we went to Denmark.
That's the first book I sold to the university.
Do you remember what book that was?
That was a book that won't say much to any of your work.
Well, don't be so surprised.
No, no, because nobody will know.
There's one great book from Brazil.
As you may know, I have been for about 25 years in Brazil.
next to the Portuguese, the owners of Brazil.
And the Dutch prince brother, Stadtholder, he was